---
layout: blogpost
draft: true
title: "D for the Win"
description: "New adventures with a new language"
imageurl: /static/res/2014-03-27-dlogo.png
imagetitle: D Programming Language
---

I first heard of the [D Programming Language](http://dlang.org/) around 2002. Back in the day, I was eagerly
trying to invent new languages with idiotic syntaxes and all sorts of crazy ideas. I was young and passionate and
totally inexperienced. But those were fun times. I recalled this when I read the introduction to
[Alexandrescu's](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrei_Alexandrescu) book, *The D Programming Language*:

> Walter Bright, a C and C++ compiler writer, [...] set out to define a language as he thought "it should be done."
> Many of us dream at some point dream at some point of defining the Right Language [...]

So I had this *warm and fuzzy feeling* &trade; to start with. Just over two months (10,000 LoC later),
I decided to write down my experience so far with the language. It's clearly not long enough a duration to
draw deep conclusions from, nor can I call myself an expert of the language, but I think even this short
perspective has valuable on its own.

## System Programming ##

Choosing the right [system programming language](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_programming_language) for a large,
resource-constrained project is tough. The obvious choice is C, of course - rock solid, low-level, native bindings to
virtually any third-party library and device drivers. But then again, it's 2014 and C's a dinosaur. Isn't it time
for more advance control flows (like exceptions), type-safety, polymorphism, closures, stronger preprocessing
capabilities and (perhaps) even automatic memory management?

The next obvious choice is C++, and if you remember my [last post](/blog/ConstructPlusPlus/),
it didn't go under my radar. But it's long since C++ was a *language*. It is now a
[conglomerate](http://www.stroustrup.com/C++11FAQ.html) of plagiarism, incomprehensible syntax and
impossibly-complicated semantics. Trying to retain compatibility with C at all costs has gotten them shooting for the
stars with wood bows. And on the more practical side, compilation times of C++ code are a non realistic, parsing C++
code (e.g., for code generation) is as complicated to compiling it, and it takes years for
[mainline compilers](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh567368.aspx) to catch up with the standards.

I spent about a week looking for better languages and tools. The contestants were [Go](http://golang.org/),
[Rust](http://www.rust-lang.org/) and D. Rust has a host of good ideas but it's unstable (moves too fast) and I
suspect it would be years before it achieved maturity. It's just too "experimental" to seriously consider it for
a large-scale project, so it went out  of question. Go is just as new and immature as Rust, but it has a much
stronger proponent backing it up and a large community, making it feel like "safer" choice. Plus, Go remains in the
comfort zone of C-style, imperative languages (whereas Rust breaks loose).

On the other hand, Go suffers from horrible syntax (I really don't know what these guys were drinking), is fully
garbage-collected, and has neither pointer arithmetics nor guarantees about memory-layout. This means working with
hardware, drivers, or interfacing with C is hard (requires [FFI](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_function_interface)).
It basically feels like a good server-side programming language, which is exactly what it was conceived for,
but not for system programming. It just lacks the fine-grained control over resources. Go lost the race too.

## D ##

D is a really convenient language. It's meant to make you feel at home right away, looking quite like C/C++, and
lets you advance at your own pace. In other words:

    import std.stdio;

    void main() {
        writeln("hello, world");
    }

D has one of the fastest and *most helpful* compilers I've seen ("did you forget to import foo?",
"undefined variable bar, did you mean baz?"), lets you be as low-level (inline ``asm``, pointer arithmetics,
manual memory management, native C ABI) or as high-level (dynamic dispatch, closures, garbage collection) as you wish.
But in my opinion, D's killer feature is its compile-time capabilities.

In a sense, D feels much like Python, or what I wish Python had been: you can introspect types at compile time and
generate code as you go. You can iterate over the fields of a ``struct``

    struct Foo {
        int a;
        int b;

        string toString() {
            auto s = typeof(this).stringof ~ "(";
            foreach(i, ref member; this.tupleof) {
                s ~= text(member);
                static if (i < this.tupleof.length - 1) {
                    s ~= ", ";
                }
            }
            return s ~ ")";
        }
    }

    writeln(Foo(7, 8)); // writes Foo(7, 8)
