---
layout: post
title: Python is Messy
---

A couple of days ago, Rudiger, a user of **RPyC** found a rather surprising bug, that in turn 
revealed just how gruesome python's inner workings are. Rudiger was working with two machines, 
one 32 bit and the other 64 bit, and one machine had a `netref` to a remote list. He then tried 
to execute something as simple as `mylist[1:]`, which to everyone's surprise threw a very 
peculiar exception: `OverflowError: Python int too large to convert to C long`.

At first, it seemed that the exception originated from the server side, but further investigation 
showed it actually originated from the client side, propagated to the server side, and then back 
to the client side: very weird indeed. I recreated the scenario with two of my  machines, 
and popped up *wireshark* to see exactly what was going on there. The last packet before the 
"resonating" exception seemed to be invoking `__getslice__` on the client-side list object, 
passing it 1 as the start index and 9223372036854775807 as the stop index. Where the heck is 
that number coming from? I added lots of debug prints and what not, but that strange number 
kept appearing there, and it was obviously not my code that placed it there.

A day later, the answer finally stroke me: 9223372036854775807 is actually `0x7fffffffffffffff`, 
which is `sys.maxint` on 64-bit machines. From that point on, the solution was simple, but it had 
revealed a nasty implementation-detail of CPython 2.xx. You see, when getting a slice of an object,
two methods come to play. The first, deprecated, method is `__getslice__`, which simply takes 
two arguments for start and stop. The second, recommended method, is `__getitem__` which accepts 
a `slice` object instead of an integer. Sadly, `<type list>` has both, which are reflected on 
the `netref` proxy, which causes this rather surprising behavior:

{% highlight pycon %}
>>> class Foo(object):
...     def __getitem__(self, x):
...             print "getitem", x
...     def __getslice__(self, *args):
...             print "getslice", args
...
>>>
>>> y=Foo()
>>> y[7]
getitem 7
>>> y[7:8]
getslice (7, 8)
>>> y[7:]
getslice (7, 2147483647)
>>> y[7:None]
getitem slice(7, None, None)
{% endhighlight %}

As you can see `y[7:]` invokes `__getslice__` with `sys.maxint`, while `y[7:None]` (which is 
equivalent) invokes `__getitem__` with a `slice` object... how lame! So when the server (64-bit) 
side code attempts to execute `mylist[1:]` it invokes `__getslice__` on the client (32-bit) side, 
passing it the server's "version" of `sys.maxint`, which goes into the C implementation and 
blows up. Monkeyballs!

So the simple (and only) solution to this issue is using `mylist[1:None]` when working with 
different-width platforms... sorry.

