---
layout: blogpost
title: "TTYs: Never gets boring"
tags: [python]
description: "A rant on the mechanics of TTY, sessions and process groups"
imageurl: https://www.tomerfiliba.com/static/res/2013-06-15-ttys.jpg
imagetitle: TTY
---

Just a short rant: I'm working on an interactive console used for debugging a computer cluster. It connects
to all nodes in the cluster and provides you with a single place to run queries. It uses the new (not yet
officially-released) [zero-deploy](https://rpyc.readthedocs.org/en/latest/api/utils_zerodeploy.html#api-zerodeploy)
feature of RPyC, which sets up a secure, single-use RPyC server on a machine, requiring only SSH access.
Once the client connection closes, the zero-deployed server will shut down and delete itself from the file system.

It's a cool feature on its own (and I'll blog about it soon), but there's a reason I'm getting you through all
of the details here. You see, the debugging console fires up SSH subprocesses in the background, over which RPyC
connections are tunneled... and then the strangest thing happened. I was running a query which was taking too
long and hit Ctrl+C to kill it and return to the interpreter. The query indeed stopped, but all of my RPyC
connections have died with it. Huh?

Here's a really short way to reproduce this scenario:

{% highlight pycon %}
>>> from subprocess import Popen, PIPE
>>> p=Popen(["sleep", "60"], stdin=PIPE, stdout=PIPE, stderr=PIPE)
>>>
>>> p.poll()      # poll() returns None as the process is still running in the background
>>>
>>>               # now hit Ctrl+C in the interactive prompt
KeyboardInterrupt
>>>
>>> p.poll()      # and voila, `sleep` was killed by SIGINT
-2
{% endhighlight %}

It's terribly confusing at first, but it happens because child processes inherit their paren't session ID.
Terminal events, such as ``SIGINT`` and ``SIGHUP``, are dispatched to all processes belonging to the terminal's
process group, so it's not just the Python interpreter to receive the signal -- every child process it spawned
will also suffer. In my case, it killed all of the SSH tunnels I had set up.

The solution is to [setsid](http://linux.die.net/man/2/setsid) before ``exec``ing the child:

{% highlight pycon %}
>>> import os
>>> p=Popen(["sleep", "60"], stdin=PIPE, stdout=PIPE, stderr=PIPE, preexec_fn=os.setsid)
>>> p.poll()
>>>
KeyboardInterrupt
>>> p.poll()
>>>
{% endhighlight %}

So I had to add this feature to [plumbum](http://plumbum.readthedocs.org/), and while I was at it, I also added
[daemonization](https://github.com/tomerfiliba/plumbum/blob/master/plumbum/daemons.py) support. In other words,
I'll have to release 1.3 soon -- even though I released 1.2 not two weeks ago. Life's a bitch and TTYs are the
mother of all monsters :)
